Chapter 18

# History

Two German hams DF4KV and DL6MAA initiated the PACTOR project. As early
as 1986, experiments with modified AMTOR protocols began. In tedious
tests, the noise conditions on the HF-Bands were investigated, and the
best transmission parameters were determined. Additionally, a lot of
mathematical calculations were performed, the PACTOR protocol deduced
from these results.

The first PTC's were wire-wrapped on bread-boards. DL6MAA built his PTC
based on a SMD Z80 single-chip processor, while DF4KV wire-wrapped his
PTC in conventional Z80 technology.

The third station that got on the air in PACTOR was DL2FAK. His PTC was
based on DL6MAA's SMD Z80 version. DL2FAK and DL6MAA ran a lot of tests
that resulted in considerable improvements to PACTOR. In the fall of
1989 he developed a PT-link system that facilitated access to
Packet-Radio nets from PACTOR.

Since the SMD based PTC of DL6MAA was too difficult for home
construction (SMD), and DF4KV's version contained too many parts, it was
decided to develop a completely new hardware design.

DL3FCJ developed the digital section of this hardware, DL6MAA developing
the modem, and carried out software adjustments. The software was
rounded out with inclusion of an RTTY and AMTOR routine from DK4FV.
DL1ZAM revised the circuit diagram and produced the
printed-circuit-board layout, and so the well known **SCS**-PTC came
about, and quickly covered the globe.

In 1993 the production of the Z80-STI peripherial chip, used in the Z80
PTC, ended. This was then the opportunity to develop the PTCplus. Based
on an MC68000 processor, the PTCplus is the springboard to a totally new
dimension in modern HF communications.

Together with the PTCplus, the development of the PTC-II was also
undertaken. The PTC-II project required a thorough knowledge of signal
processing technology and it´s associated programming. Much research
work was necessary to develop the present PACTOR-II modulation process.
Despite all this, it was possible to astonish visitors to the 1994
HAM-Radio convention with the first prototype PTC-II.

In summer of 1999 the “small brother” of the PTC-II, the PTC-IIe was
ready for sale. Being less expensive at excellent performance and the
increasing need of email via HF made the PTC-IIe to be THE standard
modem for HF-email within a short time.

Summer 2001 is the time of the PTC-IIpro. Being the successor of the
PTC-II, the first PACTOR-II modem, the PTC-IIpro now establishes the new
top of **SCS**’s goal to provide the best modem-technology for data
transmission via HF at all.

At the first of May 2002 **SCS** introduced the new developed high speed
data mode PACTOR-III. PACTOR-III is a third generation HF protocol
building on latest developments in 2-dimensional orthogonal pulse
shaping, advanced error control coding, and efficient source coding. Due
to the advanced signal processing methods applied, PACTOR-III provides
outstanding performance under poor and moderate signal conditions. As
PACTOR-III also achieves very high throughput rates under good signal
conditions, it is well-suited to HF channels with good SNR and low
signal distortion as well. During the development of PACTOR-III, high
importance was attached to compatibility with ordinary SSB transceivers
(using standard 2.2-2.4 kHz wide IF-filters). Therefore, PACTOR-III can
achieve its maximum speed with using unmodified, common SSB
transceivers. The occupied bandwidth is around 2200 Hz.

Thus PACTOR-III is the ideal means of fast and reliable data
communication over (the sometimes difficult medium) HF-radio. The new
protocol is fully backwards compatible to existing PACTOR-I/II networks.

In summer 2003 the PTC-IIex suceeded the PTC-IIe. Although both models
nearls not differ from their outer appearance, in the inside the
PTC-IIex has been deeply reworked. The PTC-IIex comes with a more
powerful DSP section, a TXCO stabilized oscillator, a better power
supply and with 2 MB of static RAM.

As an answer to the increasing demand for a modem with USB connection,
**SCS** introduced the PTC-IIusb in the mid of 2005.

The ease the use of the PACTOR-IP-Bridge, the same time **SCS**
introduced the PTC-IInet. This unit is a neat combination of a HF radio
modem with a miniature Linux computer with Ethernet connection, all
fitting inside the modem enclosure itself.
